.\"
.TH MPlayerXP 1
.SH NAME
MPlayerXP \- mplayer with extra performance
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mplayerxp <-options> streamname
.PP
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I mplayerxp
MPlayerXP is a branch of well known mplayer (http://mplayerhq.hu)
(runs on many Unices, and non-x86 CPUs, see section 6). It plays most
MPEG, AVI, MOV/QT and ASF/WMV files, supported by many native and Win32
DLL codecs. You can watch VideoCD, SVCD, DVD, and even DivX movies too.

Unique big features of mplayer(xp) are
.I VIDIX
technology which provides direct access
to BES of video cards. Due this feature MPlayerXP is first player under *nix
.B BUSMASTERING
- the case when decoded frames are transfered into videomemory without
CPU usage.
.I VESA
Provides movie playback on every VESA compatible card, even without X!,
and enables TV-out no many cards.

Main difference of
.I MPlayerXP
from
.I MPlayer
is new thread-based core. This core was designed for
.B DECODING AHEAD
feature which provides EXTRA performance of movie playback.

Several subtitles types are supported (curently 9 !) and the fonts are
rendered with nice big antialiased shaded fonts ! Of course there is support
for european/ISO 8859-1,2 (hungarian, english, czech, etc), cyrillic, korean
fonts.

.LP
.SH "XP OPTIONS"
.TP
.B \-core.xp\ <0-4>
start MPlayerXP in XP mode. You should get smoothness (fixed FPS on the screen)
with UP systems and decoding speedup with SMP.
    0 : XP mode off
    1 : Decode video in separate thread
    2 : Decode audio and video in the same separate thread
    3 : As 2 plus audio playing in separate thread
.B [default]
    4 : Decode video and audio and play audio in three different threads
.TP
.B \-core.da_buffs
Allows you specify number of buffers for decoding ahead.
You can set it from 5 upto 64. 64 is default. (I recommend to use
10 buffers as minimum to avoid screen juddering and other negative factors).
.I NOTE:
.B (For both - UP and SMP)
drivers which provide direct BES access will change it automatically
but you may force this number to decrease number of buffers. From
other side - than more buffers you are using than less number of delays
you will have during decoding and you will be able to watch frame 
which take longer time to be decoded just in time.
.IP
.SH "AUDIO-VIDEO SYNCHRONIZATION"
.I Introduction:
Almost all movies consist from two independed streams (audio and video) at least.
These streams have different bitrate and number of total frames per movie.
To play them synchronously we need to have some control points when both audio
and video should be presented simultaneously at the same moment of time.
From historical reasons, mplayerxp had two methods of A-V synchronizations:
so-called
.B sync.dap
and so-called
.B Arpi's
method. But version
.I 0.5
of mplayerxp introduces new
.B PTS-based
method of A-V synchronization.
.SS PTS-based method.
From point of player PTS-based synchronization is the best choise since player
knows PTS of every audio and video packet and knows when they should be present.
But there are some negative sides - movies which were produced with violating of
all laws of video industry. For example, simplest merging of independed files
into single one or dumping DVDs without PTS fixing :(
But even in case of such movies there are chances to reach A-V synchronization
within of short time. (Of course, if player won't sleep in case when audio PTS
is already 0 but video PTS still much large than 0).
Main positive side of this method is
.B auto-convergence
from point of synchronization.
.SS DAP and Arpi's methods.
Both methods are based of frame duration instead of PTS and that even worse -
both methods handle PTS info for video part of movie only ignoring audio PTS.
They assume that audio stream has constant bitrate and since audio frames can't
be dropped and/or played faster or slower then player can use timer of audio card
as the measure for video pts. Main negative side of this method is impossibility
to detect A-V resync if it happens by some reasons (VBR audio as one of them) or
when there exists drift between streams (due not a perfect hardware/drivers for
example).
.TP
.B \-sync.pts
use PTS based method of A/V synchronization.
.I [default]
in XP mode.
.TP
.B \-sync.force_pts_fix
force PTS fixing for "bad" (see PTS-based method explanation above) files.
Useful as "cure" tool during stream remuxing (see 
.B "MUXING"
section below).
.I Note:
It's default mode during DVD
.B riping/playback
.I Note2:
It's useful only with described above cases and is not acceptable in other cases.
.I Note3:
It may cause problems after seeking in some cases.
.TP
.B \-sync.force_pts_fix2
.I [default]
in XP mode for MPEG with -sync.pts.
Difference from the previous method is that PTS are not changed, instead are the
frame duration temporarily used until both audio and video PTS has restarted from 0.
This method does not have the problem after seeking but it can not be used together
with -sync.nopts and it is default off in that case. If -sync.force_pts_fix is set than that
method will be used even if -sync.force_pts_fix2 is set to.
.TP
.B \-sync.nopts
use Arpi's A/V sync method.
.TP
.B \-sync.nopts \-sync.dap
use alternative A/V sync method. Where is it useful?
(is not available in
.I XP
mode)
.TP
.B \-sync.frame_reorder
.I [default]
in XP mode.
Useful with -pts in XP mode on some MPEG where the frames are not stored in order.
The frames pts is reordered as they are add to buffer.
.TP
.B \-sync.delay\ <secs>
audio delay in seconds (may be +/- float value)
.TP
.B \-sync.fps\ <value>
force frame rate (if value is wrong in the header) (float number)
(works with
.I \-sync.nopts
key only)
.TP
.B \-sync.mc\ <seconds/5frame>
maximum sync correction per 5 frames (in seconds)
(works with
.I \-sync.nopts
key only)
.TP
.B \-sync.noframedrop
no frame dropping : every frame is played, audio and video may be out of
sync
.I [default]
.TP
.B \-sync.framedrop
frame dropping : decodes all video frames, but skips displaying some ones
(useful for slow cpu/systems)
.TP
.B \-sync.hardframedrop
hardframe dropping : skips displaying and decoding of some frames
.I Note:
may produce image distortion with some codecs
(useful for very slow cpu/systems)
.TP
.B \-sync.softsleep
uses high quality software timers. Efficient as the RTC, doesn't need root,
but requires more CPU.
.TP
.B \-sync.nortc
Disables using of /dev/rtc (real-time clock - high precision x86 chip)
to compute PTS.
.LP
.SH "BUS MASTERING OPTIONS (OR SPEEDUP)"
.I Introduction:
Many modern chips have the ability to act as a bus master.
Bus mastering allows to transfer data from system memory to the
frame buffer and vice versa with minimal CPU usage. When chip
acts as a bus master then it frees CPU for other useful work
and acts similar to second CPU on SMP. Performance is differ
on slow and fast CPUs and on different chips but anyway bus
mastering should povide speedup on any system.
.TP
.B \-video.bm
Enables using of bus mastering if it's available for given OS/videocard.
.I Note:
1.
To use this feature you should load dhahelper (linux-kernel driver)
which provides some function which are unavailable from user-space.
2.
You need to use VIDIX.
3.
VIDIX driver for your card should provide but card should support
bus mastering.
4. You need to use XP mode.
.TP
.I Examlpe:
.TP
cd mplayerxp/libdha/dhahelper
.TP
make all install
.TP
modprobe dhahelper
.TP
mplayerxp -vo xvidix -core.xp -video.bm -video.fs -video.aspect-ratio videoout.avi
.SS
.I Another ways to speedup playback:
In general, there are two ways to increase performance of playback -
.I 1.
Using of additional hardware (most effective way) and 
.I 2.
optimizing software to descrease number of cpu clocks required per frame
playback (most difficult and limited way). Well,
.B busmastering
is one of ways to attract additional hardware.
But not only video card may act as master. Almost all modern hardware
is able to be master in system. You should spend your attention
to investigate this quesion to have maximal performance of your
system. Under linux exists generic way to attempt enable DMA transfer
from HDD (CDROM,DVDROM) through hdparm utility:
.PP
hdparm -u1 -d1 -a8 /dev/hdX
.PP
where hdX is device with file or movie.
.TP
.I Examlpe:
hdparm -u1 -d1 -a8 /dev/cdrom
.TP
.I Note:
This command doesn't increase the speed of data transfer but
frees CPU for other useful work.
.SS
.I DMA for audio:
The best way to have DMA for audio stream is installing of SBLive! like
cards which don't have on-board memory and always act as masters. In other
case you should study options of your kernel drivers (OSS or ALSA) to find
out way to enable data transfer from RAM into audio card without CPU usage.
.SS
.I See also:
If you have very slow system (means: nothing helps) then please read also
.B "LongPlay"
description in
.I POSTPROCESSING
section
.LP
.SH "GENERAL OPTIONS"
.TP
.I NOTE
Every "flag" option has "noflag" pair, e.g. -fs opposite is -nofs
.TP
.B \-vo\ <driver>[:<device>]
select video output driver and optinaly device. "device" is valid with
SDL and GGI too, it means sub-driver then (for example: -vo sdl:aalib).

you can get the list of available drivers executing
.I mplayerxp -vo help

.TP
.B \-ao\ <driver>[:<device>]
select audio output driver and optinaly device. "device" is valid with
SDL too, it means sub-driver then (for example: -vo sdl:esd).

If using OSS, you can specify which sound device to use like this :
-ao oss:/dev/dsp1     (replaces the old -dsp option)

you can get the list of available drivers executing
.I mplayerxp -ao help

.TP
.B \-input.lircconf\ <config\ file>
specifies a configfile for LIRC (see http://www.lirc.org) if you don't like the default ~/.lircrc
.TP
.B \-v
enable verbose output (more -v means more verbosity)
.TP
.B \-msgfilter
enable filtering of verbosed messages. The value is combination of these fields:
    MSGT_GLOBAL         0x00000001
    MSGT_CPLAYER        0x00000002
    MSGT_VO             0x00000004
    MSGT_AO             0x00000008
    MSGT_DEMUXER        0x00000010
    MSGT_CFGPARSER      0x00000020
    MSGT_DECAUDIO       0x00000040
    MSGT_DECVIDEO       0x00000080
    MSGT_VOBSUB         0x00000100
    MSGT_OSDEP          0x00000200
    MSGT_SPUDEC         0x00000400
    MSGT_PLAYTREE       0x00000800
    MSGT_INPUT          0x00001000
    MSGT_OSD            0x00002000
    MSGT_CPUDETECT      0x00004000
    MSGT_CODECCFG       0x00008000
    MSGT_SWS            0x00010000
    MSGT_FINDSUB        0x00020000
    MSGT_SUBREADER      0x00040000
    MSGT_PP             0x00080000
    MSGT_NLS            0x00100000

.TP
.B \-core.benchmark
Performs benchmarking. Currently it displays 3 characteristics of movie playback:
MIN benchmark, AVE benchmark and MAX benchmark. You can estimate possibility of
usage of
.B -xp
key: you should have no dropped frames if both MIN and AVE BENCH are less than 100%.
.I Note:
The more is the difference between MIN and MAX BENCHS, the better is the performance
of new core.
.I Note:
If MIN BENCH is more than 100% then MPlayerXP will not help you! (Same as MPlayer).
.TP
.B \-play.list <file>
play files according to this filelist (1 file/row or Winamp or ASX format).
.TP
.B \-play.ss\ <time>
seek to given time position. For example :

    -ss 56         seeks to 56 seconds
    -ss 01:10:00   seeks to 1 hour 10 min
    -ss 00:40:20.3 seeks to 40 minutes and 20.3 seconds
.TP
.B \-play.sb\ <byte\ position>
seek to byte position
.TP
.B \-play.loop\ <num>
loops movie playback <num> times. 0 means forever.
.TP
.B \-input.conf\ <path\ to\ input.conf\ file>
get input bindings from an alternative input.conf file (default :
~/.mplayerxp/input.conf).
.TP
.B \-video.speed\ <factor>
Sets playback speed factor (default: 1.0)

.TP
.B \-vc <name>
force usage of a specific video codec, according to its name in codecs.conf,
for example :

    -vc divx       use VFW DivX codec
    -vc divxds     use DirectShow DivX codec
    -vc ffdivx     use libavcodec's DivX codec
    -vc ffmpeg12   use libavcodec's MPEG1/2 codec
    -vc divx4      use ProjectMayo's DivX codec

See '-vc help' for FULL list !
.TP
.B \-ac <name>
force usage of a specific audio codec, according to its name in codecs.conf,
for example :

    -ac mp3        use libmp3 MP3 codec
    -ac mp3acm     use l3codeca.acm MP3 codec
    -ac ac3        use AC3 codec
    -ac hwac3      enable Hardware AC3 passthrough
    -ac vorbis     use libvorbis
    -ac ffmp3      use ffmpeg's MP3 decoder (SLOW)

See '-ac help' for FULL list !

.TP
.B \-vfm <video\ codec\ family>
force usage of a specific codec FAMILY, and FALLBACK to default if failed.
For example:

    -vfm vfw       use VFW (Win32) codecs
    -vfm divx4     use DivX4 codec (YV12)
                   (same as -vc divx4 but fallback)
    -vfm dshow     use DirectShow (Win32) codecs
    -vfm ffmpeg    use libavcodec codecs
    -vfm xanim     use XAnim codecs

See -vc help for FULL list !

.TP
.SH "VIDEO CODEC FAMILY PARAMETERS"
Currently only one family of codecs supports parameters:
.B -vfm ffmpeg
List of parameters:
.TP
.B ffmpeg.debug=<value>
display debugging information:
      0:  disabled
      1:  picture info
      2:  rate control
      4:  bitstream
      8:  macroblock (MB) type
     16:  per-block quantization parameter (QP)
     32:  motion vector
 0x0040:  motion vector visualization (use \-noslices)
 0x0080:  macroblock (MB) skip
 0x0100:  startcode
 0x0200:  PTS
 0x0400:  error resilience
 0x0800:  memory management control operations (H.264)
 0x1000:  bugs
 0x2000:  Visualize quantization parameter (QP),
          lower QP are tinted greener.
 0x4000:  Visualize block types.
.TP
.B ffmpeg.ec=<value>
Set error concealment strategy:
   1: Use strong deblock filter for damaged MBs.
   2: iterative motion vector (MV) search (slow)
   3: all (default)
.TP
.B ffmpeg.er=<value>
Set error resilience strategy:
   0: disabled
   1: careful (Should work with broken encoders.)
   2: normal (default) (Works with compliant encoders.)
   3: aggressive (More checks, but might cause problems
      even for valid bitstreams.)
   4: very aggressive
.TP
.B ffmpeg.idct=<0\-99>
For best decoding quality use the same IDCT algorithm for decoding and encoding.
This may come at a price in accuracy, though.
.TP
.B ffmpeg.vstats
Prints some statistics and stores them in ./vstats_*.log.
.TP
.B ffmpeg.vismv=<value>
Visualize motion vectors:
   0: disabled
   1: Visualize forward predicted MVs of P-frames.
   2: Visualize forward predicted MVs of B-frames.
   4: Visualize backward predicted MVs of B-frames.
.TP
.B ffmpeg.sb=<number> (MPEG-2 only)
Skip the given number of macroblock rows at the bottom.
.TP
.B ffmpeg.st=<number> (MPEG-2 only)
Skip the given number of macroblock rows at the top.
.TP
.B ffmpeg.lowres=<number>[,<w>]
Decode at lower resolutions. Low resolution decoding is not
supported by all codecs, and it will often result in ugly artifacts.
This is not a bug, but a side effect of not decoding at full resolution:
   0: disabled
   1: 1/2 resolution
   2: 1/4 resolution
   3: 1/8 resolution

If
.I <w>
is specified lowres decoding will be used only if the width of the
video is major than or equal to
.I <w>.
.TP
.B ffmpeg.skiploopfilter=<skipvalue> (H.264 only)
Skips the loop filter (AKA deblocking) during H.264 decoding.
Since the filtered frame is supposed to be used as reference
for decoding dependent frames this has a worse effect on quality
than not doing deblocking on e.g.\& MPEG-2 video.
But at least for high bitrate HDTV this provides a big speedup with
no visible quality loss.
.I <skipvalue>
can be either one of the following:
    none:     Never skip.
    default:  Skip useless processing steps (e.g. 0
              size packets in AVI).
    nonref:   Skip frames that are not referenced (i.e.
              not used for decoding other frames, the
              error cannot "build up").
    bidir:    Skip B-Frames.
    nonkey:   Skip all frames except keyframes.
    all:      Skip all frames.
.TP
.B ffmpeg.skipidct=<skipvalue> (MPEG-1/2 only)
Skips the IDCT step.
This degrades quality a lot of in almost all cases
(see skiploopfilter for available skip values).
.TP
.B ffmpeg.skipframe=<skipvalue>
Skips decoding of frames completely.
Big speedup, but jerky motion and sometimes bad artifacts
(see skiploopfilter for available skip values).
.TP
.B ffmpeg.threads=<1\-8> (MPEG-1/2 and H.264 only)
number of threads to use for decoding (default: 1)
.TP
.B ffmpeg.o=<key>=<value>[,<key>=<value>[,...]]
Pass AVOptions to libavcodec decoder.
Note, a patch to make the o= unneeded and pass all unknown options through
the AVOption system is welcome.
A full list of AVOptions can be found in the FFmpeg manual.
Note that some options may conflict with MEncoder options.

.I EXAMPLE:
  ffmpeg_o=debug=pict

.TP
.B \-afm <audio\ codec\ family>
force usage of a specific audio format. For example:

    -afm mp3lib    use mp3lib (mp2/mp3 only)
    -afm pcm       suppose raw PCM audio
    -afm liba52    use liba52
    -afm dshow     use DirectShow (Win32) codecs
    -afm alaw      use aLaw/uLaw driver
    -afm libvorbis use libvorbis
    -afm ffmpeg    use ffmpeg's MP3 decoder
                   (even mp1)

See -ac help for FULL list !
.TP
.B \-slave
This option switches on slave mode. This is intended for use
of MPlayerXP as a backend to other programs. Instead of intercepting keyboard
events, MPlayerXP will read simplistic command lines from its stdin.
See section
.B SLAVE MODE PROTOCOL
for the syntax.
.TP
.B \-include configfile
specify config file to be parsed after the default
.TP
.B \-video.z\ <0-9>
specifies compression level for PNG output
          0 : no compression
          9 : max compression
.TP
.B \-video.noxv (SDL only)
disable XVideo hardware acceleration
.TP
.B \-video.forcexv (SDL only)
force using XVideo hardware acceleration
.TP
.B \-video.forcegl (SDL only)
force using OpenGL. (May help with cards which lack overlay/scaler
but have powerful 3D-engine. Example: some SGI cards)
.TP
.B \-play.frames\ number
MPlayerXP plays <number> frames, then quits.
.TP
.B \-core.cache\ <kbytes>
This option specifies how much memory to use when precaching a file/URL.
Especially useful on slow media with variable speed of data transfer
(sharped CDROM for example or network). Default is 1MB.
.I Note:
This options will eat from 2% upto 25% of your CPU usage depending on
bandwidth of input streams (it dramatically slowdowns DVD playback).
.TP
.B \-use-stdin
Forces reading of keyboard codes from STDIN instead of terminal's console.

.LP
.SH "DVD PLAYBACK"
.I NOTE:
These options are valid only with DVD support compiled in.
.I NOTE:
DVD playback sometimes requires deinterlacing
.B '-vf pp=lb'
.TP
.B dvdnav://
Provides graceful technology to playback whole DVD disk with correct chapter's
order. It's enough to specify:
.I mplayerxp dvdnav://
to run mplayerxp as dvdplayer.
The key
.B skipopening
should remove timer's stalls during transfering of control between chapters.
.I mplayerxp dvdnav://skipopening=on,T=1,C=2
Other example:
.I mplayerxp dvdnav://@/dev/dvd2#skipopening=off,T=2,C=14
will play
.I chapter
14 of
.I title
2 from
.I /dev/dvd2
with stalls during transfering of control between chapters.
.TP
.B dvdread://titleid,chapterid,angleid
tell MPlayerXP which movies (marked with titleid) to play. For example
sometimes '1' are trailers, and '2' is the real movie.
.B chapterid
is optional argument which specifies chapter of title for playback.
.B angleid
some DVD discs contain scenes that can be viewed from multiple angles.
Examples can be found below.
.TP
.B \-dvdauth\ <device>
provides authentification of encrypted DVD disk with using of libcss
.TP
.B \-dvdkey key
key to decrypt stream encrypted with CSS. For example : -dvdkey F169072699
(this is NOT for DVD playing! For DVD use the dvdnav:// option!)
.TP
.B \-csslib\ <path to libcss.so>
This option is useful only if libcss.so can't be autodetected
.TP
.B \-audio.lang\ <audio\ stream\ language>
Used when playing DVD disks. Expects a two-letter country code(s) as
parameter, and always tries to playback audio streams those language
matches the given code. For example: -audio.lang=hu,en will always try to play
hungarian or if it's non-existant then english audio streams if there are any.
.TP
.B \-sub.lang\ <subtitle\ language>
See the -sid option, but this one needs a two-letter parameter, a country code.
Like: -sub.lang=hu,en will always select hungarian or if it's non existant then
english subtitles, if there are any. For the list of available subtitles, use
with the -v switch and look at the output.
.TP
.B \-osd.spuaa <mode> (OSD only)
Antialiasing/\:scaling mode for DVD/\:VOBsub.
A value of 16 may be added to <mode> in order to force scaling even
when original and scaled frame size already match.
This can be employed to e.g.\& smooth subtitles with gaussian blur.
Available modes are:
    0 : none (fastest, very ugly)
    1 : approximate (broken?)
    2 : full (slow)
    3 : bilinear (default, fast and not too bad)
    4 : uses swscaler gaussian blur (looks very good)
.TP
.B \-osd.spualign <-1\-2> (OSD only)
Specify how SPU (DVD/\:VOBsub) subtitles should be aligned.
    -1 : original position
     0 : Align at top (original behavior, default).
     1 : Align at center.
     2 : Align at bottom.
.TP
.B \-osd.spugauss <0.0\-3.0> (OSD only)
Variance parameter of gaussian used by \-osd.spuaa=4.
Higher means more blur (default: 1.0).

.TP
.B \-sub.cc
Display DVD Closed Caption (CC) subtitles.
These are
.B not
the VOB subtitles, these are special ASCII subtitles for the
hearing impaired encoded in the VOB userdata stream on most region 1 DVDs.
CC subtitles have not been spotted on DVDs from other regions so far.


.LP
.SH "FRAME'S GEOMETRY CONTROL"
.B \-video.flip
flip image (useful for example for old Indeo codecs). Supported only(?)
by the 'sdl' and 'x11' outputs.
.TP
.B \-video.aspect <ratio>
set aspect ratio of movies. It's autodetected on MPEG files, and can't be
autodetected on AVI files. Examples:

    -video.aspect=4:3  or -video.aspect=1.3333
    -video.aspect=16:9 or -video.aspect=1.7777

.TP
.B \-video.monitorpixelaspect <ratio>
Set the aspect of a single pixel of your monitor or TV screen (default: 1).
A value of 1 means square pixels (correct for almost all LCDs).
Examples:

    -video.monitorpixelaspect=4:3  or 1.3333
.TP
.B \-video.width\ <x>
scale image to width (if driver supports)
.TP
.B \-video.height\ <y>
scale image to height (if driver supports)
.TP
.B \-video.zoom\ <factor>
scale image by <factor>
.TP

.LP
.SH "SCREEN CONTROL"
.TP
.B \-x.display <name>
specify the hostname and display number of the X server you want
to display on. For example : -x.display=xtest.localdomain:0
.TP
.B \-x.xinerama <screen number>
in Xinerama configurations (i.e. a single desktop that spans across multiple
displays) this option tells MPlayerXP which screen to display movie on. Range
0 - ...
.TP
.B \-x.wid\ <window\ id>
This tells MPlayerXP to use a X11 window, which is useful to embed MPlayerXP in a
browser (with the plugger extension for instance)
.TP
.B \-x.rootwin
play movie in the root window (desktop background) instead of opening
a new one. Works only with the xv and xmga drivers.
.TP
.B \-video.fsmode\ mode
This option workarounds some problems when using specific windowmanagers and
fullscreen mode. If you experience fullscreen problems, try changing this
value between 0 and 7.

        -video.fsmode=0 new method
        -video.fsmode=1 ICCCWM patch
                        (for KDE2/icewm)
        -video.fsmode=2 old method
        -video.fsmode=3 ICCCWM patch
                        plus Motif method
.TP
.B \-video.fs
fullscreen playing (centers movie, makes black bands around it and uses SW
scaler if there is no HW one available). Toggle it with the 'f' key (not
all video outputs support it).
.TP
.B \-video.vm
try to change to a different video mode. dga2, x11 (XF86VidMode) and sdl
output drivers support it.
.TP
.B \-video.aspect-ratio
Keeps aspect ratio on the screen
.I [default]
.TP
.B \-video.bpp\ <depth>
use different color depth than autodetect. Not all -vo drivers support
it (fbdev, dga2, svga, vesa).
.TP
.B \-video.screenw\ <pixels>
If you use an output driver which can't know the resolution of the screen
(fbdev/x11 and/or TVout) this is where you can specify the horizontal
resolution.
.TP
.B \-video.screenh\ <pixels>
If you use an output driver which can't know the resolution of the screen
(fbdev/x11 and/or TVout) this is where you can specify the vertical
resolution.

.LP
.SS "DRIVER SPECIFIC SCREEN CONTROL"
.TP
.B \-vo fbdev
You may pass a several arguments to this driver.
.B vidix
forcing VIDIX usage.
.B fbdev_name:fb_mode#modeconfig=value,hfreq=val,vfreq=val,dotclock=val
Here:
.B dev_name
Specifies the framebuffer device to use. By default it uses /dev/fb0 .
.B fb_mode
Change videomode to the one that is labelled as <modename> in /etc/fb.modes .
.B modeconfig
Use this config file instead of the default /etc/fb.modes .
Only valid for the fbdev driver.
.B hfreq
specifies horizontal monitor frequency.
.B vfreq
specifies vertical monitor frequency.
.B dotclock
specifies monitor's dotclock.
Example:
.I -vo fbdev:vidix
or
.I -vo fbdev:/dev/fb2/:800x600-56#modeconfig=/user/fbmodes.etc,dotclock=27778
.TP
.B \-vo vesa
You may specify several arguments for this driver:
.B vidix
to force vidix usage
.B dga
to force dga access
.B nodga
to disable dga access
.TP
.B \-vo sdl
You may force video driver through argument's line of this driver.
Example:
.I -vo sdl:ggi
To force vidix usage please use
.I -vo sdl:vidix


.LP
.SH "POSTPROCESSING"
.I Introduction:
Main goal of postprocessing is an attempt to improve the quality of the final image
to smooth some flaws of decoders and/or restore brightness/color balance if
it was lost during capturing/encoding.

.I NOTE:
You should have enough power CPU to apply postprocessing or have its hardware
implementation in videocard.
.SS GENERIC
.I NOTE:
Listed below options are implemented on software level and don't required
special hardware.
.TP
.B \-core.autoq\ <quality>
dynamically changes the level of postprocess, depending on spare CPU time
available. The number you specify will be the maximum level used. Usually you
can use some big number. You may not use together with -vf pp but it's ok with
it!
.I Note:
In XP mode it depends on tile of free buffers for decoding ahead.
.I Example:
-core.autoq 100 -vf pp=de
.I Note:
If you have not enough power CPU then it would be reasonable to limit
-core.autoq with 1 or 2 only.
.TP
.B \-video.sws\ <software\ scaler\ type>
this option sets the quality (and speed, respectively) of the software scaler,
with the -video.aspect-ratio option. For example with x11 or other outputs which lack
hardware scaler. Possible settings are:

    0 - fast bilinear (default)
    1 - bilinear
    2 - bicubic (best quality)
    3 - ?
    4 - nearest neighbor (bad quality)
    5 - area averageing scaling support
.SS VIDEO EQUALIZING
.I NOTE:
Every option in this section requires as an argument the number in range
from
.B -1000
to
.B +1000
If your hardware supports video equalizing then these options will be passed
into video hardware. Else MplayerXP will try to correct video image with using
of software code.
.I Note:
Currently only dshow and divx4linux codecs support this feature.
.TP
.B \-video.eq.brightness
Corrects brightness of video image (from black screen).
.TP
.B \-video.eq.saturation
Corrects satuartion of video image (from grayscaled image).
.TP
.B \-video.eq.contrast
Corrects contrast of video image (from black screen).
.TP
.B \-video.eq.hue
Corrects hues of video image.
.TP
.B \-video.eq.red
.TP
.B \-video.eq.green
.TP
.B \-video.eq.blue
Correct RGB intensity of video image.

.B Example:
mplayerxp -video.eq.brightness=300 -video.eq.contrast=-237 -video.eq.red=57 filename

.SS VIDEO POSTPROCESSING
.I Note:
Video postprocessing was implemented as filters whcih can be chained to build
complex effects.
.TP
.B \-vf
selects video filter. Video filters can be used for changing the properties
of the video data before the image reaches the video card.
The filters can also have arguments that changes their behaviour.
.I Example:

mplayerxp -vf mirror=x,swapuv,smartblur=1:1:1:1 media.avi

would mirror image realtively line of horizont then swap U,V planes
and apply bluring.

.I The list of video filters:

.B 1bpp
Converts 1bpp bitmap into 8/15/16/32 bits YUV/BGR images

.B 2xsai
Scale and smooth the image with the
.I 2x
scale and interpolate algorithm.

.B aspect
Resets displaysize/aspect.
You may specify a several forms of aspect:
.I 1
as X/Y
.I 2
as constant
.I 3
as string
.I 'dvb'
. Inlast case will be applied speial aspect for DVB cards!
.IP
.I Example:
.IP
mplayerxp -vf dsize=1.3 -fs movie.avi
.IP
mplayerxp -vf dsize=4/3 movie.avi
.IP
mplayerxp -vf dsize=dvb movie.avi

.B crop
Crops the given part of the image and discards the rest.
Useful to remove black bands from widescreen movies.
Accepts the following arguments:
.I x,y,w,h

.B delogo
Simple logo remover.

.B denoise3d
Variable lowpass filter. Accepts 4 arguments: LumaSpac, LumaTmp, ChromaSpac, ChromaTmp
You may specify any number of arguments from 0 upto 4. If you have specified 4 arguments
then will be activated
.I High-quality
filter. If number of arguments < 4 then ordinal filter will be used. If you want to use
high-quality filter with default parameters then call it as:
.IP
.I mplayerxp -vf denoise3d=4:3:6:8 movie.avi

.B dint
Deinterlacer. You may specify from 2 to 5 arguments.
If you have specified 2 arguments (sense and level) then drop-frame method will be used.
If you have specified 5 arguments (treshold, map, ordr, sharp, twoway) then kernel
deinterlacer will be used. Defaul values for
.I drop-frame method
are: 0.1 0.15. For 
.I kernel method
are: 0 0 10 0 0
Example:
.IP
.I mplayerxp -dint=0:0:10:0:0 movie.avi
.IP
.I mplayerxp -dint movie.avi


.B down3dright
Converts stereo movie from top-bottom to left-right field

.B eq
Software equalizer. Accepts upto 8 arguments:
gamma, contrast, brightness, saturation, red intensity, green intensity, blue intensity, gamma weight
Default values are:
.I 1.:1.:0.:1.:1.:1.:1.:1.

.B expand
Expands image height to move OSD out of picture.
May accept 2 arguments: up slice height, down slice height.
Will autodetect heigts of black area if no arguments specified.
Example:
.IP
.I mplayerxp -vf expand movie.avi

.B format
Forces(disallow) output format. To force output format you should specify its
name as argument. To disallow output format you should specify
.I '!'
character before format name.
Forcing example:
.IP
.I mplayerxp -vf format=yuy2 movie.avi
Disallowing example:
.IP
.I mplayerxp -vf format=!yuy2 movie.avi

.B framestep=<I|i|step>
Renders only every nth frame or every intra frame (keyframe).
If you call the filter with
.I I (uppercase)
as the parameter, then only keyframes are rendered.
For DVDs it generally means one in every 15/12 frames (IBBPBBPBBPBBPBB),
for AVI it means every scene change or every keyint value.

When a keyframe is found, an 
.I 'I!'
string followed by a newline character is printed, leaving the current line
of MPlayer output on the screen, because it contains the time (in seconds) and
frame number of the keyframe (You can use this information to split the AVI).
If you call the filter with a numeric parameter
.I 'step'
then only one in every 'step' frames is rendered.

If you put an
.I 'i' (lowercase)
before the number then an 'I!' is printed (like the I parameter).
If you give only the i then nothing is done to the frames, only I! is
printed.

.B il
(De)interleaver.

.B menu=<item>
Turns on OSD menu support. OSD menu maybe show by F3 key pressing.

.B mirror
Mirrors (flip) image vertically or horizontally.
Takes 1 argument:
.I x
or
.I y
which indecates mirror direction.

.B noise
Noise generator.

.B ow=<depth>:<luma_strength>:<chroma_strength>:<mode>:<delta>
Overcomplete Wavelet denoiser. Takes 5 argumens:
.I <depth>
Larger depth values will denoise lower frequency components more, but
slow down filtering (default: 8).
.I <luma_strength>
luma strength (default: 1.0)
.I <chroma_strength>
chroma strength (default: 1.0)
.I <mode>
currently unused
.I <delta>
currently unused (default: 1.0)

.B palette
8bpp indexed (using palette) -> BGR 15/16/24/32 conversion.

.B panscan
Enables pan-and-scan functionality. Truncates widescreen movies
by given coefficient (and vice-versa).
.IP
.I Examlpe:
To convert widescreen movie 16:9 (1.85/1) to normal 4:3 (1.33/1)
you need to specify
.I 1.333333
as argument from the next computing:
.IP
.I (4/3)*3=(12/9)
then
.IP 
.I 16/9 : 12/9 = 16 / 12 = 1.333333
.IP
.I Example:
mplayerxp -vf panscan=1.33333 movie.avi

.I Examlpe:
To convert normalscreen movie 4:3 (1.33/1) to widescreen one 16:9 (1.85/1)
you need to specify
.I 0.333333
as argument from the next computing:
.IP
.I (4/3)*3=(12/9)
then
.IP 
.I 12/9 : 16/9 = 12 / 16 = 0.75
.IP
.I Example:
mplayerxp -vf panscan=0.75 movie.avi
.IP
To convert normalscreen movie 4:3 (1.33/1) to widescreen one 16:10 you
need to specify:
.IP
.I Example:
mplayerxp -vf panscan=0.8333333 movie.avi

.B perspective
Perspective correcture. Requires 9 arguments: 8 refs and 1 cubic decriptor

.B pp
Postprocessing. requires codec which provides quant-info.

.B rectangle
Draws rectangle. Accepts 4 arguments: width, height, x, y.

.B rgb2bgr
Fast 24/32bpp RGB<->BGR conversion.

.B rotate
Rotates image on 90, 180, 270 degrees. Accepts 1 argument number of desrees to rotate.

.B scale
Software scaling. Accepts 6 arguments: width, height, change framedroppng flag, param1, param2.
.I Example:
.IP
mplayerxp -vo scale=800:600:0:123456:123456 media.avi

.B smartblur
Smart bluring. Requires 8 argument:
luma raduis
lume strength
luma preFilterRadius
luma threshold
chroma radius
chroma strength
chroma preFilterRadius
chroma threshold.
You may specify first 4 only. In this case chroma will have the same values as luma.
If you specify
.I preFilterRadius
then will be activated
.I 'smart adaptive blur'
algorithm. If you specify threshold as
.I 0
then will be activated
.I 'box blur'
algorithm. If preFilterRadius is ZERO and threshold is non ZERO will be activated
.I 'smart blur'
algorithm.

.B softpulldown
mpeg2 soft 3:2 pulldown.

.B swapuv
Swaps U,V planes.

.B unsharp
You may increase sharpness or increase bluring of picture. Requires complex number of arguments:
.I c:XxY:A:l:XxY:A
here
.I c
means chroma
.I XxY
specified matrix size
.I A
specified amount level. If A is negative value then bluring is applied. If A is possitive
value then sharpness is applied. If A is ZERO then plane is untouched.
You may specify different matrixes and levels for chroma and luma. Even more: apply
sharpness for luma and bluring for chroma and vice-versa.
Example:
.IP
.I mplayerxp -vf unsharp=c:3x5:2:l3x7:-0.5 movie.avi
.IP
Here chroma plane will be sharped in 4 times and luma plane will blured on 50%.

.B yuvcsp
Yuv colorspace converter.

.B yuy2
Fast YV12/Y422p -> YUY2 conversion.

.B yvu9
Fast YVU9->YV12 conversion.

.SS AUDIO POSTPROCESSING
.I Note:
Regardless the fact that output bandwidth of audio is much less than video
applying postprocessing to audio may load your CPU a lot.
.TP
.B \-af
selects audio filter. Audio filters can be used for
changing the properties of the audio data before the sound reaches
the sound card.
The filters can also have arguments that changes their behaviour.
.I Example:

mplayerxp -af resample=48000:0:0,format=S32LE media.avi

would set the output frequency of the resample plugin to 48000Hz
and the output format of the format plugin to AFMT_S32_LE.

.I The list of audio filters:

.B center=<ch>
Creates a center channel from the front channels.
May currently be low quality as it does not implement a
high-pass filter for proper extraction yet, but averages and
halves the channels instead.
The argument
.I ch
determines the channel number in which to insert the center channel.
Channel number can be between 0 and 5 (default: 5).
Observe that the number of channels will automatically
be increased to
.I ch
if necessary.

.B channels=<required number of channels>:<required number of routers>:<from:to routers>
If your sound card driver doesn't support mono signal, this
filter can be used to change the number of channels to stereo
or more.
Example 1:
.I -af channels=6:4:0:0:0:1:0:2:0:3 media.avi
would change the number of channels to 6 and set up 4 routes that copy
channel 0 to channels 0 to 3. Channel 4 and 5 will contain silence.
Example 2:
.I -af channels=2:0 media.avi
would change the number of channels to 2 and set up 0 routes.

.B comp
The compressor/expander audio filter. Unfortunatedly it's unfinished.

.B crystality=<bext>:<echo>:<stereo>:<filter>:<feedback>:<threshold>:<harmonics>
Most complex filter tries to patch mp3 format flaws by appliyng sound
crystalization technology! This filter tries to restore lost bands of
frequencies (above of 15KHz) after that slightly amplifies higher
frequencies of sound. Adds "energy" and 3d stereo to the sound.
This filter is still under development but ready for usage.
.I bext
specifies level of bandwidth extender ("exciter").
.I echo
specifies level of 3d echo.
.I stereo
specifies level of extra stereo
.I filter
specifies level of pitch shifting (to play short fragments longer)
.I feedback threshold
specify levels of lowpass reverberation.
.I harmonics
specifies level of nonlinear extra even harmonics to reach "audiophile
quality" (currently unimplemented).
Default values are:
.I af crystality=28:11:11:3:30:20:43

.B delay=<delay1>:<delay2>:<delay3>
This filter delays the sound to the loudspeakers such that the sound from
the different channels arrives at the listening position simultaneously.
It is only useful if you have more than 2 loudspeakers. This filter has a
variable number of parameters. Parameters are floating point numbers
representing the delays in ms that should be imposed on the different
channels. The minimum delay is 0ms and the maximum is 1000ms.
Example:
.I -af delay=10.5:10.5:0:0:7:0 media.avi
would delay front left and right by 10.5ms, the two rear channels and the sub
by 0ms and the center channel by 7ms.

.B dyn=<gain>
This filter compands dynamic range of the sound.
Example:
.I -af dyn=8 media.avi

.B echo3d=<echos>:<level>:<feedback>
The 3d echo filter performs effects of cathedral's hall sound.
.I echos
specifies number of echo (maximum 3).
.I level feedback
specify levels of loudness and reverb.
.I -af echo=3:11:30

.B equalizer=<gain1>:<gain2>:...<gain10>
The equalizer filter represents a 10 octave band graphic equalizer, implemented
using 10 IIR band pass filters. This means that it works regardless of what type
of audio is being played back. The center frequencies for the 10 bands are:
.I 31.25 62.5 125 250 500 1000 2000 4000 8000 16000 
This filter has 10 parameters which are floating point numbers between -12 and+12
representing the gain in dB for each frequency band.
Example:
.I -af equalizer=11:11:10:5:0:-12:0:5:12:12 media.avi
would amplify the sound in the upper and lower frequency region while
canceling it almost completely around 1kHz.

.B export
This audio filter exports the incoming signal to other processes using memory
mapping (mmap()). Memory mapped areas contain a header:
.I <int number of channels><int buffer size><unsigned long long counter to keep sync,
.I it's updated every time new data is exported.>
The rest is payload (non-interleaved) 16bit data.

.B extrastereo=<mul>
This audio filter (linearly) increases the difference between left and right
channels (like the XMMS extrastereo plugin) which adds some sort of live effect
to playback.
This filter has one parameter:
.I mul
is the difference coefficient, an optional floating point number that defaults
to 2.5. If you set it to 0.0, you will have mono sound (average of both channels).
If you set it to 1.0, sound will be unchanged, if you set it to -1.0, left and
right channels will be swapped.
.I Usage : mplayerxp -af extrastereo media.avi

.I mplayerxp -af extrastereo=3.45 media.avi

.B ffenc=<codec>:<bitrate>
This audio filter converts raw audio stream into compressed by selected codec.
Compressed audio stream can be used for dumping into file.
.I Usage : mplayerxp -ao null -af ffenc=mp3:128000,raw=1.mp3 cdda://1
To get list of available audio encoder please type:
.I -af ffenc=help

.B format=<required output format>
If your sound card driver doesn't support signed 16bit int, this
filter can be used to change the format to one which your sound card
can understand.
Example:
.I -af format=S32LE

.B gate
The noise gate audio filter audio filter. Unfortunatedly it's unfinished.

.B hrtf=<mode>
Experimental audio filter that mixes 5.1 and 5.1 with matrix
encoded rear channels into headphone signal using FIR filtering
with HRTF (Head Related Transfer Function).
Although it is not possible to exactly imitate a surround system,
.I MPlayerXP's
HRTF filter does provide more spatially immersive audio in
2-channel headphones. Regular downmixing simply combines all the channels
into two; besides combining the channels, 
.I hrtf
generates surround echoes, increases the stereo separation slightly, and alters
the volume of some frequencies. Whether HRTF sounds better may be dependent on
the source audio and a matter of personal taste, but it is definitely worth
trying out.
.B "Mode Meaning:"
.I m -
matrix decoding of the rear channel
.I s -
2-channel matrix decoding
.I 0 -
no matrix decoding (default)
To play a DVD with HRTF:
.I mplayerxp -ao alsa -af hrtf dvdread://@/dev/sr0#1 
.B hrtf
only works well with 5 or 6 channels. Also,
.B hrtf
requires 48 kHz audio. DVD audio is already 48 kHz, but if
you have a file with a different sampling rate that you want to play using
.B hrtf
you must resample it:
.I mplayerxp filename -af resample=48000,hrtf

.B karaoke
Simple voice removal filter exploiting the fact that voice is
usually recorded with mono gear and later 'center' mixed onto
the final audio stream.
Beware that this filter will turn your signal into mono.
Works well for 2 channel tracks; do not bother trying it
on anything but 2 channel stereo.

.B lp=<faked out> (aka LongPlay)
This filter fakes audio resampling. This trick helps to play sound longer
if your card support a several sample rates. So if you have slow machine
then you may avoid framedropping by
.B playing
movie
.B longer.
Althourgh you will have bassed sound.
.I Note:
You may also speedup playback by faking of highrated audio stream but it's
not very useful
.I Example: -af lp=32000 media.avi

.B pan=<channels>:<in1>:<in2>...<out1>:<out2>...<out8>
Use the pan filter to mix channels arbitrarily. It is basically a combination
of the volume control and the channels filter. There are two major uses for
this filter:
Down-mixing many channels to only a few, stereo to mono for example.
Varying the "width" of the center speaker in a surround sound system.
This filter is hard to use, and will require some tinkering before the
desired result is obtained. The number of options for this filter
depends on the number of output channels:
.I channels
is an integer between 1 and 8 and is used for setting the number of input
channels. This option is required, leaving it empty results in a runtime
error.
.I <in1>...<out8>
are floating point values between 0 and 1. l[i][j] determines how much of
input channel j is mixed into output channel i.
Example 1:
.I -af pan=1:0.5:0.5 -channels 1 media.avi
would down-mix from stereo to mono.
Example 2:
.I -af pan=3:1:0:1:0.5:0.5 -channels 3 media.avi
would give 3 channel output leaving channels 0 and 1 intact, and mix
channels 0 and 1 into output channel 2 (which could be sent to a
sub-woofer for example).

.B raw=filename
This audio filter stores audio stream into file in raw format.
Usefull as satelite for
.B ffenc
filter.
.I Usage : mplayerxp -ao null -af ffenc=mp3:128000,raw=1.mp3 cdda://1
Note: if filename ends with
.I .wav
then RIFF WAVE header will be added automatically.

.B resample=<Frequency in Hz>:<sloppy>:<type>
This filter can for example be used if you have a fixed frequency
sound card or if you are stuck with an old sound card that is only
capable of max 44.1kHz. Limitations in your hardware are not auto
detected, so you have to specify the sample frequency explicitly.
.I sloppy
This option can be used if the startup of the playback is extremely slow.
It's enabled by default.
.B type
.I 0 
- represents linear interpolation.
.I 1 
- represents resampling using a poly-phase filter-bank and integer processing.
.I 2
- represents resampling using a poly-phase filter-bank and floating point processing.

.B scaletempo=<scale>:<stride>:<overlap>:<search>:<speed>
Scales audio tempo without altering pitch, optionally synced to playback
speed (default).

This works by playing
.I 'stride'
ms of audio at normal speed then
consuming
.I 'stride*scale'
ms of input audio. It pieces the strides together by blending
.I 'overlap'%
of stride with audio following the previous stride.
It optionally performs a short statistical analysis on the next
.I 'search'
ms of audio to determine the best overlap position.
.B scale=<amount>
Nominal amount to scale tempo.
Scales this amount in addition to speed.
(default: 1.0)
.B stride=<amount>
Length in milliseconds to output each stride.
Too high of value will cause noticable skips at high scale amounts and
an echo at low scale amounts.
Very low values will alter pitch.
Increasing improves performance.
(default: 60)
.B overlap=<percent>
Percentage of stride to overlap.
Decreasing improves performance.
(default: .20)
.B search=<amount>
Length in milliseconds to search for best overlap position.
Decreasing improves performance greatly.
On slow systems, you will probably want to set this very low.
(default: 14)
.B speed=<tempo|pitch|both|none>
Set response to speed change. Scale tempo in sync with speed (default)
.I pitch
Reverses effect of filter. Scales pitch without altering tempo.
.I WARNING:
Looses synch with video. Scale both tempo and pitch. Ignores speed changes

.B sinesuppress=<freq>:<delay>
Remove a sine at the specified frequency.
Useful to get rid of the 50/60hz noise on low quality audio equipment.
It probably only works on mono input.
.I <freq>
The frequency of the sine which should be removed (in Hz) (default: 50)
.I <delay>
Controls the adaptivity (a larger value will make the filter adapt to
amplitude and phase changes quicker, a smaller value will make the
adaptation slower) (default: 0.0001).
Reasonable values are around 0.001.

.B sub=<cutoff freq>:<channel>
This filter adds a sub woofer channel to the audio stream. The audio data used
for creating the sub-woofer channel is an average of the sound in channel 0 and
channel 1. The resulting sound is then low-pass filtered by a 4th order Butterworth
filter with a default cutoff frequency of 60Hz and added to a separate channel in
the audio stream. Warning: Disable this filter when you are playing DVDs with Dolby
Digital 5.1 sound, otherwise this filter will disrupt the sound to the sub-woofer.
This filter has two parameters:
.I cutoff freq.
is an optional floating point number used for setting the cutoff frequency for the
filter in Hz. The valid range is 20Hz to 300Hz. For the best result try setting the
cutoff frequency as low as possible. This will improve the stereo or surround sound
experience. The default cutoff frequency is 60Hz.
.I channel
is an optional integer between 0 and 5 which determines the channel number in which
to insert the sub-channel audio. The default is channel number 5. Observe that the
number of channels will automatically be increased to given value if necessary.

.B surround=<delay>
Matrix encoded surround sound can be decoded by the surround filter.
Dolby Surround is an example of a matrix encoded format. Many files with 2
channel audio actually contain matrixed surround sound. To use this feature
you need a sound card supporting at least 4 channels. This filter has one
parameter that is an optional floating point number between 0 and 1000 used
for setting the delay time in ms for the rear speakers. The default value for
delay is 20ms.
Example:
.I -af surround=15 -channels 4 media.avi
would add surround sound decoding with 15ms delay for the sound to the
rear speakers.

.B volnorm
This audio filter maximizes the volume without distorting the sound.
.I Usage: mplayerxp -af volnorm media.avi

.B volume=<volume>:<softclip>
Software volume control is implemented by the volume audio filter. Use this
filter with caution since it can reduce the signal to noise ratio of the sound.
In most cases it is best to set the level for the PCM sound to max, leave this
filter out and control the output level to your speakers with the master volume
control of the mixer. In case your sound card has a digital PCM mixer instead of
an analog one, and you hear distortion, use the MASTER mixer instead. If there is
an external amplifier connected to the computer (this is almost always the case),
the noise level can be minimized by adjusting the master level and the volume
knob on the amplifier until the hissing noise in the background is gone. This
filter has two options:
.I volume <-200 - +60>
is a floating point number between -200 and +60 which represents the volume level
in dB. The default level is 0dB.
.I softclip
is a binary control that turns soft clipping on and off. Soft-clipping can make
the sound more smooth if very high volume levels are used. Enable this option if
the dynamic range of the loudspeakers is very low. Be aware that this feature
creates distortion and should be considered a last resort.

.LP
.SH "DIRECT RENDERING"
.I NOTE:
Direct rendering is case when codec decodes to extrenal buffer.
Main goal of direct rendering implementing is decoding directly
into video memory but many VO drivers provide direct rendering
into their temporary buffers to avoid multiple copying between
buffers. Currently, only
.B VIDIX
provides real direct rendering into video memory.
.TP
.B \-video.nodouble
disables doublebuffering.
With the DGA driver this also disables OSD support but yields some speed gain.
.TP
.B \-video.double
enables doublebuffering.
Double buffering is technology when video output is performed into separate
video buffers. It supresses OSD flickering. When you specify
.I -core.xp
key it forces multibuffering mode and uses all available (video) memory
to enable
.I decoding ahead
.TP
.B \-video.vsync
forces video hardware to wait VSYNC signal before buffer switching
in doublebuffered mode. This key is useful only to supressing screen
juddering during buffer switching.

.LP
.SH "OSD CONTROL"
.TP
.B \-osd.font\ <path\ to\ font.desc\ file>
search for the OSD/SUB fonts in an alternative directory (default :
~/.mplayerxp/font/font.desc). For example:

    -osd.font ~/.mplayerxp/arial-14/font.desc
.TP
.B \-osd.ffactor\ <number>
resample alphamap of the font. Can be:

        0    plain white fonts
        0.75 very narrow black outline [default]
        1    narrow black outline
        10   bold black outline
.TP
.B \-sub.file\ <subtitle\ file>
use/display this subtitle file
.TP
.B \-sub.fps\ <rate>
specify frame/sec rate of subtitle file (float number)
(ONLY for frame-based SUB files, i.e. NOT MicroDVD format!)
(default: the same fps as the movie)
.TP
.B \-sub.delay\ <sec>
delays subtitles by <sec> seconds. Can be negative.
.TP
.B \-sub.vob\ <vobsub\ file\ without\ extention>
specify the VobSub files that are to be used for subtitle.  This is
the full pathname without extensions, i.e. without the ".idx", ".ifo"
or ".sub".
.TP
.B \-sub.vobid\ <vobsub\ subtitle\ id>
specify the VobSub subtitle id.  Valid values range from 0 to 31.
.TP
.B \-osd.level\ <level>
specifies which mode the OSD should start in (0 : none, 1 : seek, 2: seek+timer)
(default = 2)
.TP
.B \-sub.cp\ codepage
If your system supports iconv(3), you can use this option to
specify codepage of the subtitle. Examples:

        -sub.cp=latin2
        -sub.cp=cp1250
.TP
.B \-sub.unicode
tells MPlayerXP to handle the subtitle file as UNICODE.
Contrary: -sub.nounicode
.TP
.B \-sub.utf8
tells MPlayerXP to handle the subtitle file as UTF8.

.IP
.SH SOUND CONTROL
.TP
.B \-audio.mixer\ <device>
this option will tell MPlayerXP to use a different device for mixing than
/dev/mixer.
.TP
.B \-audio.off
don't play sound
.TP
.B \-audio.bs\ <bytes>
sound card audio buffer size (in bytes, default: measuring)
.TP
.B \-audio.stereo mode
select type of MP2/MP3 stereo output.

        Stereo         0
        Left channel   1
        Right channel  2
.TP
.B \-audio.channels n
select number of audio output channels to be used

        Stereo         2
        Surround       4
        Full 5.1       6

Currently this option is only honoured for AC3 audio.
.TP
.B \-audio.rate <Hz>
specifies Hz to playback audio on. Has effect on playback speed!

.LP
.SS "DRIVER SPECIFIC SOUND CONTROL"
.TP
.B \-ao alsa
Forces to put audio stream into ALSA (Advaced Linux Sound Architecture).
You may pass a several arguments to this driver.
.B alsa_device#mmap=value,noblock=val
Here:
.B alsa_device
specifies non-default alsa device
.B mmap
sets mmap mode of soundcard access.
.B noblock
sets nonblock mode of soundcard access.
Example:
.I -ao alsa:hw:0,3#mmap=on,noblock=off
configures
.B alsa
playback on third device of first soundcard in mmap block mode.
.I -ao alsa:hw:0,-1
will show driver/soundcard #0 capabilities.
.I -ao alsa:hw:2,-1
will show driver/soundcard #2 capabilities.
.TP
.B \-ao oss
Forces to put audio stream into OSS (Open Sound System).
You may specify DSP defice as argument of this driver.
Example:
.I -ao oss:/dev/dsp2
also you may display capabilities of soundcard/driver capabilities as:
.I -ao oss:/dev/dsp:-1
.TP
.B \-ao sdl
Forces to put audio stream into SDL (Simple Direct Layer).
You may force audio driver through argument's line of this driver.
Example:
.I -ao sdl:esd
.TP
.B \-ao null
Forces to put audio stream into /dev/null.
You may write audio stream into file instead of /dev/null by specifing
filename and mode as arguments:
Example:
.I -ao null
will use /dev/null.
.I -ao null:@filename.raw:pcm
will write audio bytes into file as PCM stream.
.I -ao null:@filename.wav:wav
will write audio bytes into file as RIFF WAV format.

.LP
.SH "STREAM CONTROL"
.I Note:
Almost all stream's driver support help on-demand. To get it
please type stream://help. For example: dvdnav://help
.TP
.B file://filename
play specified filename
.TP
.B http://URL
play specified network location
.TP
.B cdda:// <track>
play CD DA track from device instead of plain file
.TP
.B vcd:// <track>
play Video CD track from device instead of plain file
.TP
.B vcdnav://
play whole Video CD with using libvcd.so
.TP
.B dvd:// <track>
play DVD track from device instead of plain file
.TP
.B dvdnav://
play DVD with using of libdvdnav.so
.TP
.B dvdplay://
play DVD with using of libdvdplay.so
.TP
.B tv:// <suboptions>
This option enables the TV grabbing feature of MPlayerXP.
This code is not tested!!!
.TP
.B oss://<@device>#<channels>,<samplerate>,<sampleformat>
This option enables the OSS grabbing feature of MPlayerXP.
.TP
.B -play.shuffle
Play files in random order.
.TP
.B -net.ipv4 (network only)
will force mplayerxp to use IPv4 protocol over network. That is
default settings.
.TP
.B -net.ipv6 (network only)
will force mplayerxp to use IPv6 protocol over network.
.TP
.B -net.ipv4-only-proxy (network only)
Skip the proxy for IPv6 addresses.
It will still be used for IPv4 connections.
.TP
.B -net.cookies (network only)
Send cookies when making HTTP requests.
.TP
.B -net.cookies-file <filename> (network only)
Read HTTP cookies from <filename> (default: ~/.mozilla/ and ~/.netscape/)
and skip reading from default locations.
The file is assumed to be in Netscape format.
.TP
.B -net.pass <password> (network only)
Specify password for HTTP authentication.
.TP
.B -net.user <username> (network only)
Specify username for HTTP authentication.
.TP
.B -net.user-agent <string>
Use <string> as user agent for HTTP streaming.
.TP
.B -net.bandwidth <value> (network only)
Specify the maximum bandwidth for network streaming (for servers that are
able to send content in different bitrates).
Useful if you want to watch live streamed media behind a slow connection.
With Real RTSP streaming, it is also used to set the maximum delivery
bandwidth allowing faster cache filling and stream dumping.
.LP
.SH "MOVIE PARSER OR DEMUXING"
.TP
.B \-audio.id\ <id>
select audio channel [MPG: 0-31 AVI: 1-99 ASF: 0-127 VOB: 128-...]
.TP
.B \-video.id\ <id>
select video channel [MPG: 0-15  AVI:  -- ]
.TP
.B \-sub.id\ <id>
Turns on DVD subtitle displaying. Also, you MUST specify a number which
corresponds to a DVD subtitle language (0-31). For the list of available
subtitles, use with the -v switch and look at the output.
.TP
.B \-avi.ni
force usage of non-interleaved AVI parser (fixes playing
of some bad AVI files)
.TP
.B \-avi.idx
rebuilds INDEX of the AVI, thus allowing seeking. Useful with broken/incomplete
downloads, or badly created AVIs.
.TP
.B \-avi.noidx
disregards INDEX of the AVI. Useful for files with broken index (desyncs, etc).
Seeking will NOT be possible. You can fix the index permanently
with
.I MUXING
, see below.
.TP
.B \-avi.forceidx
force rebuilding of INDEX. Useful for files with broken index (desyncs, etc).
Seeking will be possible. You can fix the index permanently with
.I MUXING
, see below.


.LP
.SH "MUXING"
.I Introduction:
This method was designed network as sucker and as facility to dump DVD into signle
files but you may use it as "cure" tool in some cases (see
.B \-sync.force_pts_fix
for detail).
.I Note:
Also you may specify
.B -play.ss
and
.B -play.frames
options to proceed only part of source stream.
.TP
.B \-core.dump @<type>:<sname/subtype>
specifies dump type and stream name
.SS Dumping types
.TP
.B stream
The most simplest method of stream copy. Dumps the stream into sname.
Useful for example as network sucker.
.I Example:
-dump @stream:my_file.ext
.TP
.B raw
dumps raw stream into file. You may specify which part of movie should be
dumped. Examples:

.I -core.dump @raw:audio
 - will dump audio data only in raw format into a_dump.raw

.I -core.dump @raw:video
 - will dump video data only in raw format into v_dump.raw

.I -core.dump @raw:sub
 - will dump subtitles only in raw format into s_dump.raw

.I -core.dump @raw:filename.ext
 - will dump all streams in raw format into filename.ext

.TP
.B mpxp
remulitplexes any stream which can be recognized by demuxer
into the stream of MPXPAV64 format. (Most compact A-V container
today) Examples:

.I -core.dump @mpxp:filename.ext
 - will dump all streams in MPXPAV64 format into filename.ext

.I -core.dump @mpxp:audio
 - will dump audio data only in MPXPAV64 format into a_dump.raw

.I -core.dump @mpxp:video
 - will dump video data only in MPXPAV64 format into v_dump.raw

.I -core.dump @mpxp:sub
 - will dump subtitles only in MPXPAV64 format into s_dump.raw

.TP
.B lavf
remulitplexes any stream which can be recognized by demuxer
into any stream which is supported by libavformat library.
 Examples:

.I -core.dump @lavf:avi
 - will dump all streams in AVI format into avs_dump.avi

.I -core.dump @lavf:asf
 - will dump all streams in ASF format into avs_dump.asf

.I Note:
you have no possibility to write audio or video part of stream
in this case.

.IP
.SH KEYBOARD CONTROL
.TP
.I NOTE
These keys may/may not work, depending on your output drivers and input demuxer.
.SS navigation keys
.TP
.B arrow_left/arrow_right
seek backward/forward  10 seconds
.TP
.B arrow_up/arrow_down
seek backward/forward   1 minute
.TP
.B pgup/pgdown
seek backward/forward  10 minutes
.TP
.B [ / ]
Decrease/increase playback speed by 10%
.TP
.B { / }
Halve/double current playback speed
.TP
.B backspace
Resets playback speed to normal

.SS playlist navigation keys
.TP
.B < / >
Go backward/forward in playlist
.TP
.B enter
Go forward in playlist, even over the end
.TP
.B home/end
Next/prevous playtree entry in parent list
.TP
.B ins/del
(ASX only) next/prevous alternative source

.SS manual A-V synchronization keys
.TP
.B +/-
adjust audio delay by +/- 0.1 second
.TP
.B z/x
adjust subtitle delay by +/- 0.1 second
.TP
.B d
Toggle frame droping states: noframedrop/framedrop/hardframedrop
.SS general purposes keys
.TP
.B p
or
.B SPACE
pause movie (press any key)
.TP
.B q
stops stream reading than plays unfinished buffers and quits program
.B ESC
stop playing and quit program immediately
.TP
.B / *
decrease/increase volume
.TP
.B m
mute sound
.TP
.B o
toggle OSD: none / seek / seek+timer
.TP
.B r/t 
Move subtitles up/down
.SS special purposes keys
(the following keys are valid only when using -vo xv OR -vo [vesa|fbdev]:vidix
OR -vo xvidix OR -vc divxds. The latter is slow!)
.TP
.B 1/2
adjust contrast
.TP
.B 3/4
adjust brightness
.TP
.B 5/6
adjust hue
.TP
.B 7/8
adjust saturation
.TP
.B s
grab screenshot
.TP
.B f
toggle fullscreen mode
.TP
.B a
Cycle through the available audio tracks
.TP
.B v
Cycle through the available video tracks
.TP
.B c
Cycle through the available subtitles
.SS TV purposes keys
These keys are only valid if MPlayerXP was compiled with TV
input support
.TP
.B h/k
select previous/next TV channel
.TP
.B n
Change norm
.TP
.B u
Change channel list
.SS DVDNAV purposes keys
.TP
.B Keypad-8
Select upper button
.TP
.B Keypad-2
Select lower button
.TP
.B Keypad-4
Select left button
.TP
.B keypad-6
Select right button
.TP
.B Keypad-5
Select DVD's menu
.TP
.B Keypad-Ins
Activate (press) selected button
.TP
.B b g i j l y
Reserved keys 
.IP
.SH SLAVE MODE PROTOCOL
If the -slave switch is given, playback is controlled by a 
line-based protocol with the following tokens:
.TP
       stop            pause playback

play            resume playback

seek <NUM>      continue at second NUM

skip <NUM>      skip NUM seconds (may be negative)

quit            exit MPlayerXP

.IP
.SH FILES AND DIRECTORIES
.TP
.I CONFIG FILES
Settings are stored system-wide in the /etc/mplayer.conf file,
and per-user in $HOME/.mplayerxp/config. The directory
$HOME/.mplayerxp and the 'config' are created if doesn't exist.
.TP
.I FONTS
Fonts are searched in $HOME/.mplayerxp/font. There must be a font.desc
file, and files with .RAW extension.
.TP
.I SUBTITLE FILES
MPlayerXP currently supports 10 subtitle formats : MicroDVD, SubRip, unnamed,
SAMI (smi), vplayer, RealMedia RT, ssa (Sub Station Alpha), AQT, VobSub, and our own: MPsub.
Sub files are searched in this priority : (for example /mnt/cdrom/movie.avi)
    /mnt/cdrom/movie.sub
     (utf/UTF/sub/SUB/srt/SRT/smi/SMI/rt/RT/txt/TXT/ssa/SSA)
    $HOME/.mplayerxp/sub/movie.sub
     (utf/UTF/sub/SUB/srt/SRT/smi/SMI/rt/RT/txt/TXT/ssa/SSA)
    $HOME/.mplayerxp/default.sub
.IP
.SH MRL
MPlayerXP supports MRL (media resource locator). This means that you may
change default location of media resources through specifying them as
arguments of protocol. Main concepts of MPlayerXP's MRL is:
.B UPR://~user*pass@media_source:port#arg1=value1,arg2=value2,arg3=value3
Here:
.B UPR
is Unified Protocol Request
.B user
is username (maybe useful in rare cases)
.B pass
is user's password (maybe useful in rare cases)
.B media_source
is location of media source
.B port
is port of media source
.B arg=value
are plugin specific parameters
Almost all stream plugins support MRL.
Example:
.B dvdread://@/tmp/dvd_image.udf#1,5-7

.IP
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.TP
.B Quickstart DVD playing
mplayerxp dvdnav://
.TP
.B Playing title2 of DVD from non default device
mplayerxp dvdnav://@/dev/cdrom2#T=2
.TP
.B Play only chapters 5, 6, 7
mplayerxp dvdread://1,5-7
.TP
.B Play only titles 1, 5, 7
mplayerxp dvdread://@/dev/sr0#1 dvdread://@/dev/sr0#5 dvdread://@/dev/sr0#7
.TP
.B Play chapters 8, 9 from non default device
mplayerxp dvdread://@/dev/dvd2#1,5-7
.TP
.B Multiangle DVD playing
mplayerxp dvdread://1,1-0,2
.TP
.B Quickstart Video CD playing
mplayerxp vcdnav://
.TP
.B Quickstart Video CD playing from cd_image
mplayerxp vcdnav://@/tmp/cd_image.iso
.TP
.B Stream from HTTP
mplayerxp http://mplayerhq.hu/example.avi
.TP
.B Play 5th track from CDDA
mplayerxp cdda://5
.TP
.B Convert subtitle to MPsub (to ./dump.mpsub)
mplayerxp dummy.avi -sub source.sub -dumpmpsub
.TP
.B DVD ripping
mplayerxp dvdnav:// -asfdump
.TP
.B Fixing PTS for some MPEGS
mplayerxp file.mpg -asfdump -nopts
.TP
.B Clip creating
mplayerxp file.ext -asfdump -ss 00:31:20 -frames 4672
.TP
.B Playing files with specific names
mplayerxp file://--help
.TP
.B Capturing FM radio
1. Select your favorite FM radio with
.B fmio
or other tools:
.I fmio -d v4l -f 101.9 
2. Save it as MP3 stream:
.I mplayerxp oss:// -af ffenc=mp3:96000,raw=101_9-radio.mp3 -ao null
Note: You need to have P2-400 or better to perform capturing in
real-time mode. Less CPU burning mode:
.I mplayerxp oss://2,32000,S16LE -af ffenc=mp3:96000,raw=1019.wav -ao null
Unfortunatedly, on old Cel-266 is only way to perform real-time FM grabbing is
storing uncompressed 32KHz stream into raw file:
.I mplayerxp oss://2,32000,S16LE -af raw=1019.wav -ao null
You may be happy with:
.I mplayerxp oss://2,44100,S16LE -ao null:@1058.wav:wav

.TP
.B CDDA grabbing
Using tradional
.B mp3
codec:
.I mplayerxp cdda://1 -af ffenc=mp3:256000,raw=1.mp3 -ao null
You may increase quality with using other codecs:
.I mplayerxp cdda://1 -af ffenc=ac3:320000,raw=1.ac3 -ao null

.LP
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
To have correct NLS support please check that your system have
correctly defined variables:
.TP
.B LANG
The POSIX method of locale definition (have main priority).
Example for *nix:
.I set LANG=ru_RU.KOI8-R
.TP
.B LANGUAGE
The POSIX method of locale definition (have second priority after`LANG').
Example for win32:
.I set LANGUAGE=ru_RU.CP1251

.LP
.SH BUGS
Probably exist. E-Mail them to developers ;)

.LP
.SH AUTHORS
See AUTHORS file.

MPlayerXP is (C) 2002
.I Nickols_K <nickols_k@mail.ru>
2000-2002
.I Arpad Gereoffy <sendmail@to.mplayer-users>

This manpage is written and maintained by
.I Gabucino .
and modified by
.I Nickols_K.
.LP
.SH STANDARD DISCLAIMER
Use only at your own risk! There may be errors and inaccuracies that could
be damaging to your system or your eye. Proceed with caution, and although
this is highly unlikely, the author doesn't take any responsibility for that!
.\" end of file
